.TH workspace 1 "February 2026" "workspace 1.2" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
workspace \- manage terminal sessions and git worktrees
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B workspace
.B open
.RI [ path ]
.br
.B workspace
.B close
.RI [ session_name ]
.br
.B workspace
.B remove
.RI [ branch_name ]
.br
.B workspace
.B worktree
.B create
.RB [ \-\-setup ]
.I branch_name
.br
.B workspace
.B worktree
.B setup
.br
.B workspace
.B worktree
.B remove
.RI [ branch_name ]
.br
.B workspace
.B worktree
.B prune
.RB [ \-\-force ]
.br
.B workspace
.B help
.br
.B workspace
.B \-\-version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B workspace
is a unified tool for managing terminal sessions and git worktrees. It auto-detects the terminal environment and operates in one of five modes:
.B tmux mode
(inside a tmux session),
.B kitty mode
(running in Kitty terminal with remote control),
.B ghostty mode
(running in Ghostty terminal without tmux),
.B alacritty mode
(running in Alacritty terminal without tmux), or
.B unsupported
(none detected).
.PP
The tool provides two operational modes:
.B sessionizer mode
for quick directory-based sessions, and
.B worktree mode
for full git worktree management.
.PP
In sessionizer mode (default), the tool helps you quickly open existing directories in terminal sessions. It uses fzf to find git projects (both regular repositories and worktrees) in your current directory tree.
.PP
In worktree mode (via the
.B worktree
subcommand), the tool provides full git worktree capabilities: creating new worktrees for branches, managing their lifecycle, and automatically setting up terminal sessions. When creating a worktree, the tool creates a git worktree in a sibling directory, sets up a session with a configurable layout (tmux only), copies environment and certificate files from the parent worktree, and optionally runs setup commands.
.SH TERMINAL DETECTION
The tool automatically detects the terminal environment at startup:
.TP
.B tmux mode
Active when the
.B TMUX
environment variable is set (running inside a tmux session). Provides full functionality including pane layouts, environment variable forwarding, and send-keys support.
.TP
.B kitty mode
Active when the
.B KITTY_WINDOW_ID
environment variable is present and not inside tmux. Uses Kitty tabs via
.B kitten @
remote control commands. Requires
.B allow_remote_control
to be enabled in Kitty's configuration (set to
.BR yes " or " socket-only ).
This mode provides near-full functionality:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Tab creation via \fBkitten @ launch \-\-type=tab\fR with working directory and tab title
.IP \(bu 2
Environment variable forwarding (worktree_* variables set via \-\-env flags at launch)
.IP \(bu 2
Programmatic tab queries (prune can detect active tabs via \fBkitten @ ls\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
Send-keys support (\-\-setup sends commands via \fBkitten @ send\-text\fR)
.IP \(bu 2
Tabs can be closed programmatically via \fBkitten @ close\-tab\fR
.RE
.IP
No pane layout support (WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_LAYOUT is ignored; only single-pane tabs are created).
.TP
.B ghostty mode
Active when
.B TERM_PROGRAM
is set to "ghostty" and not inside tmux or Kitty. Uses Ghostty tabs instead of tmux sessions. On macOS, new tabs are opened via
.BR "open -a Ghostty" ;
on Linux, via the
.B ghostty
CLI. This mode has reduced functionality:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
No pane layout support (WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_LAYOUT is ignored)
.IP \(bu 2
No environment variable forwarding (worktree_* variables are not set in tabs)
.IP \(bu 2
No programmatic tab queries (prune cannot detect active tabs)
.IP \(bu 2
No send-keys support (\-\-setup prompts the user to run \fBworkspace worktree setup\fR manually)
.IP \(bu 2
Tabs cannot be closed programmatically (user must close manually)
.RE
.TP
.B alacritty mode
Active when the
.B ALACRITTY_WINDOW_ID
environment variable is present, and not inside tmux. Uses Alacritty windows instead of tmux sessions. When the
.B alacritty
CLI is on PATH and an IPC socket is available (via
.BR ALACRITTY_SOCKET ),
new windows are created in the same Alacritty process using
.BR "alacritty msg create-window" .
On macOS, if the CLI is not on PATH (typical for DMG installs), the binary is resolved from the app bundle at
.BR /Applications/Alacritty.app/Contents/MacOS/alacritty .
This mode has the same reduced functionality as Ghostty mode:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
No pane layout support (WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_LAYOUT is ignored)
.IP \(bu 2
No environment variable forwarding (worktree_* variables are not set in windows)
.IP \(bu 2
No programmatic window queries (prune cannot detect active windows)
.IP \(bu 2
No send-keys support (\-\-setup prompts the user to run \fBworkspace worktree setup\fR manually)
.IP \(bu 2
Windows cannot be closed programmatically (user must close manually)
.RE
.TP
.B unsupported
When no supported terminal is detected, terminal-dependent commands (open, close) will fail with an error. Git-only commands (worktree remove, worktree prune) still work.
.PP
If tmux is running inside Kitty, Ghostty, or Alacritty, tmux mode takes priority. Kitty takes priority over Ghostty and Alacritty.
.SH MODES
.TP
.B Sessionizer Mode (Default)
Without the
.B worktree
subcommand, the tool operates as a terminal session manager. The
.B open
command finds existing git projects using fzf and creates sessions for them. This mode is ideal for:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Quick navigation between projects
.IP \(bu 2
Opening existing worktrees
.IP \(bu 2
Working with any git repository
.IP \(bu 2
Simple tmux session management
.RE
.TP
.B Worktree Mode
With the
.B worktree
subcommand, the tool provides full git worktree lifecycle management. Additional commands (create, remove, prune) become available for managing git worktrees. This mode is ideal for:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Feature branch development
.IP \(bu 2
Working on multiple branches simultaneously
.IP \(bu 2
Automated worktree setup with custom layouts
.IP \(bu 2
Managing worktree lifecycle (creation, pruning)
.RE
.SH COMMANDS
.SS Common Commands (Both Modes)
.TP
.BI "open " [path]
Open an existing directory in a terminal session (tmux session, Kitty tab, Ghostty tab, or Alacritty window). If no path is provided, the behavior depends on context:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B Inside a git worktree:
Uses fzf to list all existing worktree branches and remote branches. On selection, creates or switches to the worktree session (equivalent to
.BR "worktree create" ).
.IP \(bu 2
.B Otherwise:
Uses fzf to interactively select from git projects (repositories and worktrees) found up to 3 levels deep from the current directory.
.RE
.IP
In tmux mode, if a session for the directory already exists, attaches to it (or switches to it if already inside tmux). Otherwise, creates a new session with the configured layout. In Kitty mode, if a tab with the same title exists, focuses it; otherwise, creates a new tab. In Ghostty mode, always opens a new tab (existing tabs cannot be queried). In Alacritty mode, always opens a new window (existing windows cannot be queried).
.IP
Session names are derived from the directory path. If the target is within the current directory, the relative path is used; otherwise, the basename is used. Dots and slashes are replaced with underscores for tmux compatibility.
.TP
.BI "close " [session_name]
Close the specified session. In tmux mode, kills the tmux session. In Kitty mode, closes the matching tab via remote control. In Ghostty mode, prints a message to close the tab manually. In Alacritty mode, prints a message to close the window manually. If
.I session_name
is omitted, auto-detects from the current environment. An error is returned if no terminal backend is detected.
.TP
.BI "remove " [branch_name]
Close the session and remove the git worktree for the specified branch. If
.I branch_name
is omitted, uses the current branch. Protected branches (main, master, _main, _master) cannot be removed. Any processes holding files in the worktree directory are automatically terminated.
.IP
This is a convenience shorthand for closing the session and removing the worktree in one step, without requiring the
.B worktree
subcommand.
.TP
.B help
Display usage information and exit. Also accepts
.B \-\-help
and
.BR \-h .
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version number and exit. Also accepts
.BR \-v .
.SS Worktree Subcommands (workspace worktree <subcommand>)
.TP
.BI "create " "[--setup] branch_name"
Create a new git worktree for the specified branch and open a terminal session (tmux session, Kitty tab, Ghostty tab, or Alacritty window). The worktree is created as a sibling directory to the main repository. The tool automatically:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Fetches latest changes from remote
.IP \(bu 2
Creates a worktree from a remote branch if it exists on origin, or creates a new local branch
.IP \(bu 2
Sets up a terminal session with the configured layout (tmux only; Kitty/Ghostty/Alacritty open a tab/window)
.IP \(bu 2
Copies .env and .pem files from the parent repository
.IP \(bu 2
Propagates worktree_* environment variables to the session (tmux and Kitty only)
.RE
.IP
If the worktree already exists, it is reused. The tool performs a smart pull with safety checks:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
Skips pull for local-only branches (no remote tracking)
.IP \(bu 2
Skips pull if there are uncommitted changes
.IP \(bu 2
Fast-forwards if possible
.IP \(bu 2
Warns if the branch has diverged from remote
.RE
.IP
Any existing session for the branch is closed and recreated with the current layout configuration (tmux), a new tab is opened (Kitty/Ghostty), or a new window is opened (Alacritty).
.IP
Use the
.B \-\-setup
flag to run the command specified in
.B WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_SETUP_CMD
after creating the worktree. In tmux and Kitty modes, the command is sent to the first pane/window. In Ghostty and Alacritty modes, the user is prompted to run
.B workspace worktree setup
manually in the new tab/window.
.TP
.B setup
Run the command specified in
.B WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_SETUP_CMD
in the current worktree. This is useful for manually running setup after opening a worktree, especially in Ghostty and Alacritty modes where send-keys/send-text is not available.
.TP
.BI "remove " [branch_name]
Remove the git worktree for the specified branch. If
.I branch_name
is omitted, uses the current branch. Protected branches (main, master, _main, _master) cannot be removed. Any processes holding files in the worktree directory are automatically terminated.
.TP
.BI "prune " [--force]
Remove all worktrees that have no active session. In Ghostty and Alacritty modes, active tabs/windows cannot be detected, so the tool relies on the clean-working-tree check as a safety net. In Kitty mode, active tabs are detected via remote control. By default, worktrees with uncommitted changes are skipped. This command preserves:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
The main worktree
.IP \(bu 2
Protected branches (main, master, _main, _master)
.IP \(bu 2
Worktrees with active sessions (tmux and Kitty only)
.IP \(bu 2
Worktrees with uncommitted changes (unless
.B \-\-force
is used)
.RE
.IP
Use the
.B \-\-force
flag to also remove worktrees that have uncommitted changes. Stray processes holding files in the worktree are killed automatically if the initial removal fails.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_LAYOUT
Defines the tmux layout configuration for new sessions. Uses a compact format:
.IR <count><direction> , <count><direction> ,...
where
.I count
is the number of panes and
.I direction
is one of:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B v
\- vertical splits (side-by-side, using even-horizontal layout)
.IP \(bu 2
.B h
\- horizontal splits (stacked, using even-vertical layout)
.IP \(bu 2
.B g
\- grid layout (equal squares, using tiled layout)
.RE
.IP
Each comma-separated segment creates a new tmux window. The first pane of the first window is selected after creation.
.IP
.B Default:
1v (single pane, single window)
.IP
.B Examples:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
.B 2v
\- One window with 2 vertical panes (side-by-side)
.IP \(bu 2
.B 3h
\- One window with 3 horizontal panes (stacked)
.IP \(bu 2
.B 4g
\- One window with 4 panes in a 2x2 grid
.IP \(bu 2
.B 2v,3h,1v
\- Three windows: first has 2 vertical panes, second has 3 horizontal panes, third has 1 pane
.RE
.TP
.B WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_SETUP_CMD
Command to run when
.B \-\-setup
is specified during worktree creation, or when
.B workspace worktree setup
is invoked directly. In tmux mode with \-\-setup, the command is sent as keystrokes to the first pane. In Kitty mode, the command is sent via
.B kitten @ send\-text
to the new tab. In Ghostty and Alacritty modes, the user is prompted to run
.B workspace worktree setup
manually. Typically used for installing dependencies or running build commands.
.IP
.B Example:
export WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_SETUP_CMD="pnpm i && pnpm build"
.TP
.B worktree_*
Any environment variable prefixed with
.B worktree_
(except those starting with
.BR worktree_INTERNAL )
will be set in the session environment with the prefix removed (tmux and Kitty). For example,
.B worktree_API_KEY
becomes
.B API_KEY
in the tmux session or Kitty tab. In Ghostty and Alacritty modes, these variables are not forwarded.
.TP
.B TMUX
Set automatically by tmux. When present, the tool operates in tmux mode.
.TP
.B KITTY_WINDOW_ID
Set automatically by Kitty in all child processes. When present and TMUX is not set, the tool operates in Kitty mode. Kitty's remote control must be enabled (set
.B allow_remote_control
to
.B yes
or
.B socket-only
in kitty.conf) for full functionality.
.TP
.B TERM_PROGRAM
Used to detect Ghostty terminal. When set to "ghostty" and TMUX is not set, the tool operates in Ghostty mode.
.TP
.B ALACRITTY_WINDOW_ID
Set automatically by Alacritty in all child processes. When present and TMUX is not set, the tool operates in Alacritty mode.
.TP
.B ALACRITTY_SOCKET
Set automatically by Alacritty to the path of its IPC Unix socket. When present, enables efficient window creation via
.B alacritty msg create-window
(windows share the same Alacritty process). If the
.B alacritty
CLI is not on PATH (e.g. macOS DMG install), the binary is resolved from the app bundle.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I .env
When creating a worktree, all
.B .env
files are copied from the parent worktree to the new worktree, preserving directory structure. Existing
.B .env
files in the target worktree are never overwritten.
.TP
.I *.pem
All
.B .pem
certificate files are copied from the parent worktree to the new worktree, preserving directory structure. Existing
.B .pem
files in the target worktree are never overwritten.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Sessionizer Mode
.TP
Open a project using fzf to select from current directory:
.B workspace open
.TP
Open a specific directory:
.B workspace open ~/projects/myapp
.TP
Close current tmux session:
.B workspace close
.TP
Kill session and remove worktree for current branch:
.B workspace remove
.TP
Kill session and remove worktree for a specific branch:
.B workspace remove feature/old-feature
.SS Worktree Mode
.TP
Create a worktree for a feature branch:
.B workspace worktree create feature/user-auth
.TP
Create worktree and run setup commands:
.B workspace worktree create \-\-setup feature/api-refactor
.TP
Run setup command in the current worktree:
.B workspace worktree setup
.TP
Open an existing worktree:
.B workspace open
.TP
Remove worktree for a specific branch:
.B workspace worktree remove feature/old-feature
.TP
Remove current branch's worktree:
.B workspace worktree remove
.TP
Clean up all unused worktrees:
.B workspace worktree prune
.TP
Force-clean all unused worktrees, including those with uncommitted changes:
.B workspace worktree prune \-\-force
.SH WORKFLOW EXAMPLES
.SS Quick Project Switching
.nf
.RS
# Navigate to your projects directory
cd ~/projects

# Use fzf to find and open any project
workspace open

# Work in the project...

# Close when done
workspace close
.RE
.fi
.SS Feature Development with Worktrees
.nf
.RS
# Configure layout and setup command
export WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_LAYOUT="2v,3h"
export WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_SETUP_CMD="pnpm install"

# Create a new worktree with auto-setup
workspace worktree create \-\-setup feature/new-api

# Work on the feature...

# Close the session (worktree remains on disk)
workspace close

# Later, reopen the worktree
workspace open

# When feature is merged, kill session and remove worktree
workspace remove feature/new-api

# Or clean up all unused worktrees at once
workspace worktree prune
.RE
.fi
.SH CONFIGURATION
Set environment variables in your shell configuration:
.PP
.nf
.RS
# Tmux layout: 2 vertical panes in first window, 4-pane grid in second
export WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_LAYOUT="2v,4g"

# Setup command for new worktrees
export WORKSPACE_INTERNAL_SETUP_CMD="pnpm install && pnpm build"

# Variables forwarded to tmux/Kitty sessions (prefix removed)
export worktree_API_URL="http://localhost:3000"
export worktree_NODE_ENV="development"
.RE
.fi
.PP
.B Project Discovery:
The
.B open
command without arguments uses
.BR find (1)
to search for git projects up to 3 levels deep from the current directory. It finds both regular git repositories (directories with
.B .git
directory) and git worktrees (directories with
.B .git
file pointing to parent repository).
.SH DEPENDENCIES
.TP
.B Required:
.BR bash (1),
.BR git (1)
.TP
.B Terminal (one required):
.BR tmux (1)
(full functionality),
.UR https://sw.kovidgoyal.net/kitty/
Kitty
.UE
terminal (near-full functionality, requires remote control; see TERMINAL DETECTION),
Ghostty terminal (reduced functionality, see TERMINAL DETECTION), or
.UR https://alacritty.org
Alacritty
.UE
terminal (reduced functionality, see TERMINAL DETECTION)
.TP
.B Optional:
.BR fzf (1)
(interactive project selection),
.BR lsof (1)
(process cleanup during worktree removal)
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Error (missing branch name, protected branch removal, worktree not found, invalid directory, etc.)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR git-worktree (1),
.BR tmux (1),
.BR kitty (1),
.BR kitten (1),
.BR alacritty (1),
.BR alacritty-msg (1),
.BR fzf (1),
.BR fish (1),
.BR zsh (1)
.SH AUTHOR
.B @sjdonado
.UR https://github.com/sjdonado
.UE
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at:
.UR https://github.com/sjdonado/workspace/issues
.UE
